# General asynchronous programming concepts

## Asynchronous?

- Normally, a given program's code runs straight along, with only one thing happening at once. If a function relies on the result of another function, it has to wait for the other function to finish and return, and until that happens, the entire program is essentially stopped from the perspective of the user.
- There's no sense sitting there waiting for something when you could let the other task chug along on another processor core and let you know when it's done. This lets you get other work done in the meantime, which is the basis of asynchronous programming.
- It is up to the **_programming environment_** you are using (web browsers, in the case of web development) to **provide you with APIs that allow you to run such tasks asynchronously.**

## Blocking code

- When a web app runs in a browser and it executes an intensive chunk of code without returning control to the browser, the browser can appear to be frozen. This is called blocking; the browser is blocked from continuing to handle user input and perform other tasks until the web app returns control of the processor.

```
const btn = document.querySelector('button');
btn.addEventListener('click', () => {
  let myDate;
  for(let i = 0; i < 10000000; i++) {
    let date = new Date();
    myDate = date;
  }

  console.log(myDate);

  let pElem = document.createElement('p');
  pElem.textContent = 'This is a newly-added paragraph.';
  document.body.appendChild(pElem);
});
```

- When running the example, open your JavaScript console then click the button — you'll notice that the paragraph does not appear until after the dates have finished being calculated and the console message has been logged.
- The code runs in the order it appears in the source, and the later operation doesn't run till the earlier operation has finished running.

## Threads

- A thread is basically a single process that a program can use to complete tasks. **Each thread can only do a single task at once:**

```
Task A --> Task B --> Task C
```

- Each task will be run sequentially; a task has to complete before the next one can be started.
- As we said earlier, many computers now have multiple cores, so can do multiple things at once. Programming languages that can support multiple threads can use multiple cores to complete multiple tasks simultaneously:

```
Thread 1: Task A --> Task B
Thread 2: Task C --> Task D
```

### JavaScript is single-threaded

- JavaScript is traditionally single-threaded. Even with multiple cores, you could only get it to run tasks on a single thread, called the main thread

```
Main thread: Render circles to canvas --> Display alert()
```

- After some time, JavaScript gained some tools to help with such problems. _Web-workers allow you to send some of the JavaScript processing off to a separate thread, called a worker so that you can run multiple JavaScript chunks simultaneously._ You'd generally use a worker to run expensive processes off the main thread so that user interaction is not blocked.

```
 Main thread: Task A --> Task C
Worker thread: Expensive task B
```

```
 const btn = document.querySelector('button');
      const worker = new Worker('worker.js');

      btn.addEventListener('click', () => {
        worker.postMessage('Go!');

        let pElem = document.createElement('p');
        pElem.textContent = 'This is a newly-added paragraph.';
        document.body.appendChild(pElem);
      });

      worker.onmessage = function(e) {
        console.log(e.data);
      }


onmessage = function() {
  let myDate;
  for(let i = 0; i < 10000000; i++) {
    let date = new Date();
    myDate = date
  }

  postMessage(myDate);
}
```

- Now when you click the button, the browser is able to display the paragraph before the dates have finished calculating. Once the worker has finished calculating, it logs the final date to the console. The first operation no longer blocks the second.

## Asynchronous code

- Web workers are pretty useful, but they do have their limitations.
- **A major one is they are not able to access the DOM — you can't get a worker to directly do anything to update the UI.**
- The second problem is that although code run in a worker is not blocking, it is still basically synchronous. This becomes a problem when a function relies on the results of multiple previous processes to function. Consider the following thread diagrams:

```
Main thread: Task A --> Task B
```

- In this case, let's say Task A is doing something like fetching an image from the server and Task B then does something to the image like applying a filter to it. If you start Task A running and then immediately try to run Task B, you'll get an error, because the image won't be available yet.

```
  Main thread: Task A --> Task B --> |Task D|
Worker thread: Task C -----------> |      |
```

- In this case, let's say Task D makes use of the results of both Task B and Task C. If we can guarantee that these results will both be available at the same time, then we might be OK, but this is unlikely. If Task D tries to run when one of its inputs is not yet available, it will throw an error.
- To fix such problems, browsers allow us to run certain operations asynchronously. Features like Promises allow you to set an operation running (e.g. the fetching of an image from the server), and then wait until the result has returned before running another operation:

```
Main thread: Task A                   Task B
    Promise:      |__async operation__|
```

- Since the operation is happening somewhere else, the main thread is not blocked while the async operation is being processed.

## Synchronous JavaScript

- To allow us to understand what asynchronous JavaScript is, we ought to start off by making sure we understand what synchronous JavaScript is

```
const btn = document.querySelector('button');
btn.addEventListener('click', () => {
  alert('You clicked me!');

  console.log("we proved JS is synchronous")
})
```

- In this block, the lines are executed one after the other:
  1. We grab a reference to a \<button> element that is already available in the DOM.
  2. We add a click event listener to it so that when the button is clicked:
     1. An alert() message appears.
     2. Once the alert is dismissed, we create a \<p> element.
     3. We then give it some text content.
     4. Finally, we append the paragraph to the document body.
- While each operation is being processed, nothing else can happen — rendering is paused.
- This is because as we said in the previous article, JavaScript is single threaded. Only one thing can happen at a time, on a single main thread, and everything else is blocked until an operation completes.
- So in the example above, after you've clicked the button the paragraph won't appear until after the OK button is pressed in the alert box.

`Note: It is important to remember that alert(), while being very useful for demonstrating a synchronous blocking operation, is terrible for use in real world applications.`

## Asynchronous JavaScript

- For reasons illustrated earlier (e.g. related to blocking), **many Web API features now use asynchronous code to run,** especially those that access or fetch some kind of resource from an external device, such as fetching a file from the network, accessing a database and returning data from it, accessing a video stream from a web cam, or broadcasting the display to a VR headset.

- Why is this difficult to get to work using synchronous code? Let's look at a quick example. When you fetch an image from a server, you can't return the result immediately. That means that the following (pseudocode) wouldn't work:`

```
let response = fetch('myImage.png'); // fetch API is asynchronous
let blob = response.blob();
// display your image blob in the UI somehow
```

- That's because you don't know how long the image will take to download, so when you come to run the second line it will **throw an error** (possibly intermittently, possibly every time) because the response is not yet available. Instead, you need your code to wait until the response is returned before it tries to do anything else to it.
- There are **two main types of asynchronous code style** you'll come across in JavaScript code,
  1. **old-style callbacks** and
  2. **newer promise-style code.**

## Async callbacks

- **Async callbacks are functions** that are **specified as arguments **when _calling a function which will start executing code in the background._
- When the background code finishes running, it calls the callback function to let you know the work is done, or to let you know that something of interest has happened.
- Using callbacks is slightly old-fashioned now, but you'll still see them in use in a number of older-but-still-commonly-used APIs.

```
btn.addEventListener('click', () => {
  alert('You clicked me!');

  let pElem = document.createElement('p');
  pElem.textContent = 'This is a newly-added paragraph.';
  document.body.appendChild(pElem);
});
```

- The first parameter is the type of event to be listened for, and the second parameter is a callback function that is invoked when the event is fired.
- When we pass a callback function as an argument to another function, we are only passing the function's reference as an argument, i.e, **the callback function is not executed immediately.**
- It is **“called back”** (hence the name) asynchronously somewhere inside the containing function’s body.
- The containing function is responsible for executing the callback function when the time comes.

```
function loadAsset(url, type, callback) {
  let xhr = new XMLHttpRequest();
  xhr.open('GET', url);
  xhr.responseType = type;

  xhr.onload = function() {
    callback(xhr.response);
  };

  xhr.send();
}

function displayImage(blob) {
  let objectURL = URL.createObjectURL(blob);

  let image = document.createElement('img');
  image.src = objectURL;
  document.body.appendChild(image);
}

loadAsset('coffee.jpg', 'blob', displayImage);
```

- Callbacks are versatile — not only do they allow you to control the order in which functions are run and what data is passed between them, they also allow you to pass data to different functions depending on circumstance. So you could have different actions to run on the response downloaded, such as processJSON(), displayText(), etc.

`Note that not all callbacks are async — some run synchronously.`

- An example is when we use **Array.prototype.forEach()** to loop through the items in an array. it doesn't wait for anything — it runs immediately.

## Promises

- Promises are the new style of async code that you'll see used in modern Web APIs. A good example is the fetch() API, which is basically like a modern, more efficient version of XMLHttpRequest.

```
fetch("https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos/1")
  .then(function (response) {
    return response.json();
  })
  .then(function (data) {
    console.log(data);
  })
  .catch(function (err) {
    console.log(`Fetch problem:  ${err.message}`);
});
```

- Here we see fetch() taking a single parameter — the URL of a resource you want to fetch from the network — and **returning a promise.**
- The **promise is an object** representing the completion or failure of the async operation. It represents an intermediate state, as it were.
- In essence, it's the browser's way of saying "**I promise to get back to you with the answer as soon as I can,**" hence the name "promise."
- . Neither of the possible outcomes have happened yet, so the fetch operation is currently waiting on the result of the browser trying to complete the operation at some point in the future.
- We've then got three further code blocks chained onto the end of the fetch():
  - Two then() blocks. Both contain a callback function that will run if the previous operation is successful, and **each callback receives as input the result of the previous successful operation,** so you can go forward and do something else to it. **Each .then() block returns another promise**, **meaning that you can chain multiple .then() blocks onto each other**, so multiple asynchronous operations can be made to run in order, one after another.
  - **The catch() block at the end runs if any of the .then() blocks fail** — **in a similar way to synchronous try...catch blocks, an error object is made available inside the catch()**, which can be used to report the kind of error that has occurred. Note however that synchronous try...catch won't work with promises, although it will work with async/await,

## The event queue

- Async operations like promises are put into an event queue, which runs after the main thread has finished processing so that they do not block subsequent JavaScript code from running. The queued operations will complete as soon as possible then return their results to the JavaScript environment.

## Promises versus callbacks

- Promises have some similarities to old-style callbacks. **They are essentially a returned object to which you attach callback functions, rather than having to pass callbacks into a function.**
- However, **promises are specifically made for handling async operations,** and have many advantages over old-style callbacks:
  - You can chain multiple async operations together using multiple .then() operations, passing the result of one into the next one as an input. This is much harder to do with callbacks, which often ends up with a messy "pyramid of doom" (also known as callback hell).
  - **Promise callbacks are always called in the strict order they are placed in the event queue.**
  - Error handling is much better — all errors are handled by a single .catch() block at the end of the block, rather than being individually handled in each level of the "pyramid".
  - Promises avoid inversion of control, unlike old-style callbacks, which lose full control of how the function will be executed when passing a callback to a third-party library.
